.\" Copyright 2000 VMware, Inc.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Print with groff -mandoc <thisfile> | lpr
.Dd August 14, 2003
.Dt diskbw 8
.Os "VMware ESX Server" 2.0
.Sh NAME
.Nm diskbw
.Nd VMware ESX Server disk bandwidth resource management
.Sh COPYRIGHT
.if n VMware ESX Server is Copyright 2000 VMware, Inc.  All rights reserved.
.if t VMware ESX Server is Copyright 2000 VMware, Inc.  All rights reserved.
.Sh INTRODUCTION
VMware ESX Server provides dynamic control over the relative amount of disk
bandwidth allocated to each virtual machine (VM).  The control of disk
bandwidth is done separately for each disk. The system manages the
allocation of disk bandwidth to VMs automatically based on allocation
parameters and system load. This is done in a way that maintains fairness
and tries to maximize throughput.
.Pp
Initial disk bandwidth allocation values for a VM may be specified in
its configuration file.  An administrator may also modify disk
bandwidth allocation parameters dynamically using the VMware
Management Interface, the Service Console procfs interface, or the
Perl API.  Reasonable defaults are used automatically when parameters
are not specified explicitly.  Information about current disk
bandwidth allocations and other status is also available via the
Management Interface, the Service Console procfs interface, and the
Perl API.
.Pp
.Ss Allocation Policy
.Pp
VMware ESX Server uses a modified proportional-share allocation policy for
controlling disk bandwidth per VM.  This policy attempts to control the
disk bandwidth used by a VM to access a disk, while also trying to maximize
throughput to the disk. Disk bandwidth shares entitle a VM to a fraction of
the bandwidth to a disk.  For example, a VM that has twice as many shares
as another for a particular disk is entitled to consume twice as much
bandwidth to the disk, provided that they are both actively issuing
commands to the disk. Bandwidth consumed by a VM is represented in
consumption units. Every SCSI command issued to the disk effectively
consumes one unit by default and additional units proportional to the size
of the data transfer associated with the command.
.Pp
Throughput to the disk is maximized through the use of a ``quantum'' of disk
requests from a VM to a disk. A VM is allowed to issue as many as a quantum
of requests to a disk without being preempted by another VM.  The issuing
of a quantum is applicable only if the requests in the quantum are
``sequential'' on the disk.
.Pp
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Pp
.Ss VM Configuration File Options
.Bl -tag -width xxxx
.It Pa scsi0:1.name = fsname:xyz.dsk
This is the standard method to specify the VMFS file underlying a virtual disk.
.Pp
.It Pa sched.scsi0:1.shares = n
This configuration file option specifies the initial disk bandwidth
share allocation for a VM for the specified disk (in this case,
\fIscsi0:1\fP) to be \fIn\fP shares.  The valid range of numeric
values for \fIn\fP is 1 to 100000, enabling a large range of
allocation ratios.  The special named values \fIlow\fP, \fInormal\fP,
and \fIhigh\fP may also be used.  These named values are converted
into numbers automatically, using the configurable ESX Server options
\fIDiskSharesLow\fP, \fIDiskSharesNormal\fP, and \fIDiskSharesHigh\fP,
described below.  The default allocation is \fInormal\fP, which
by default is 1000 shares.
.Pp
Note that it is possible to specify the shares multiple times for a
particular disk in a configuration file. In this case, the last value
specified is used.
.El
.Ss Service Console Interface
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width xxxx
.It Pa /proc/vmware/vm/id/disk/vmhbax:y:z
Reading from this file reports the number of disk bandwidth shares allocated
to the VM identified by \fIid\fP for the disk identified by vmhbax:y:z, and
disk usage statistics.
.Pp
Writing a number \fIn\fP to this file changes the number of disk
bandwidth shares allocated to the VM identified by \fIid\fP to
\fIn\fP.  The valid range of numeric values for \fInshares\fP is 1 to
100000.  The special named values \fIlow\fP, \fInormal\fP, and
\fIhigh\fP may also be used.  These named values are converted into
numbers automatically, using the configurable ESX Server options
\fIDiskSharesLow\fP, \fIDiskSharesNormal\fP, and \fIDiskSharesHigh\fP,
described below.
.Pp
.It Pa /proc/vmware/config/DiskSchedNumReqOutstanding
VMware ESX Server option that specifies the number of oustanding commands
allowed to a disk when there is more than one world competing for bandwidth
to this disk. Defaults to 16. Larger sizes may impair the ability of
ESX server to provide fair allocation of disk bandwidth.
.Pp
.It Pa /proc/vmware/config/DiskSchedQuantum
VMware ESX Server option that specifies the number of sequential requests
that a VM may issue to a disk without being pre-empted by another VM.
Defaults to 8.
.Pp
.It Pa /proc/vmware/config/DiskSharesLow
VMware ESX Server option used to convert the special named shares
value \fIlow\fP into a number.  Defaults to 500.
.Pp
.It Pa /proc/vmware/config/DiskSharesNormal
VMware ESX Server option used to convert the special named shares
value \fInormal\fP into a number.  Defaults to 1000.
.Pp
.It Pa /proc/vmware/config/DiskSharesHigh
VMware ESX Server option used to convert the special named shares
value \fIhigh\fP into a number.  Defaults to 2000.
.El
.Pp
.Sh EXAMPLES
.Ss Configuration file snippet
.nf
scsi0.virtualdev = vmxbuslogic
scsi0:1.present = TRUE
scsi0:1.name = vmhba0:2:0:5:rh6.2.dsk
scsi0:1.mode = persistent
sched.scsi0:1.shares = high
.Pp
scsi0:2.present = TRUE
scsi0:2.name = scratchfs:scratch1.dsk
sched.scsi0:2.shares = 800
.fi
.Pp
.Sh SEE ALSO
cpu(8), mem(8), numa(8)
