.\" Copyright 2000 VMware, Inc.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Print with groff -mandoc <thisfile> | lpr
.Dd January 20, 2004
.Dt filters 5
.Os "VMware ESX Server" 2.1
.Sh NAME
.Nm filters
.Nd VMware ESX Server network filters
.Sh COPYRIGHT
.if n VMware ESX Server is Copyright 2000 VMware, Inc.  All rights reserved.
.if t VMware ESX Server is Copyright 2000 VMware, Inc.  All rights reserved.
.Sh INTRODUCTION
VMware ESX Server supports network packet filters as loadable modules.
In general, network packets may be inspected, modified, dropped, or
forwarded through a filter.  A loadable module defines a \fIfilter
class\fP; multiple \fIfilter instances\fP may be active for each
loaded class.
.Pp
The current release allows transmit filters to be attached to virtual
machines (VMs) using a procfs interface.  The following section 
describes how to attach, detach, and query filter instances.
.Pp
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Bl -tag -width xxxx
.It Pa /proc/vmware/filters/status
Reading from this file reports network filtering status information,
including a list of all available filter classes, and for each VM
with attached filters, its list of attached filter instances.
.Pp
.It Pa /proc/vmware/filters/xmitpush
Command file used to add a new transmit filter instance to a VM.
Writing \fIid class [args]\fP to this file attaches a new instance
of filter \fIclass\fP instantiated with \fIargs\fP to the VM 
identified by \fIid\fP.
.Pp
.It Pa /proc/vmware/filters/xmitpop
Command file used to detach a transmit filter from a VM.  
Writing \fIid\fP to this file detaches the last filter attached
to the VM identified by \fIid\fP.
.Pp
.It Pa /proc/vmware/filters/xmit
This directory contains a file for each active filter instance.  Each
file named \fIclass.n.id\fP corresponds to the \fIn\fPth instance of
filter class \fIclass\fP, which is attached to the VM identified by
\fIid\fP.
.Pp
Reading from a file reports status information for the filter instance
in a class-defined format.  Writing to a file issues a command to
the filter instance using a class-defined syntax.
.El
.Pp
.Sh CAVEATS
The current release allows only a single network packet filter to be
attached to each VM.  This restriction will be removed if VMware
distributes multiple filter classes; currently the only supported
filter class is the \fInfshaper\fP traffic shaping module.
.Pp
Receive filters are not yet implemented.
.Pp
.Sh SEE ALSO
nfshaper(8), vmkload_mod(1)
