.\" Copyright 2000 VMware, Inc.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Print with groff -mandoc <thisfile> | lpr
.Dd February 7, 2001
.Dt findnic 1
.Os VMnix
.Sh NAME
.Nm findnic
.Nd VMkernel network card locator
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm findnic
\fIOPTIONS\fR 
\fINIC-NAME\fR 
\fILOCAL-IP\fR 
\fIREMOTE-IP\fR
.Sh COPYRIGHT
.if n VMware ESX Server is Copyright 2000 VMware, Inc.  All rights reserved.
.if t VMware ESX Server is Copyright 2000 VMware, Inc.  All rights reserved.
.Sh DESCRIPTION
When network interface cards (NICs) are given to the vmkernel, sometimes it
is difficult to map from the name of the vmkernel device to the actual 
physical NIC on the machine.  For example, if there are four Intel eepro cards in
a machine that are dedicated to the vmkernel, these four cards will end up
being called vmnic0, vmnic1, vmnic2, and vmnic3.  The name of each card
is based on its order in the PCI bus/slot hierarchy on the machine - the lower
the bus and slot, the lower the number at the end of the name.  If you know the
bus and slot order of the NICs then you can figure out which NIC has which name.
However, if you don't you can use the findnic program to help you make the
proper association of NIC to name.
.Pp
The findnic program takes a vmkernel network device name, an IP address
to give the device on the local machine, and an IP address that findnic should
try to ping.  findnic will then ping the remote IP address.  This will allow you
to determine which NIC is which by either looking at the flashing lights on the
NIC cards to see which one is flashing or by seeing if the ping itself is
successful.
.Sh OPTIONS
.br
\fB-f\fR
.br
    Do a flood ping.
.br

\fB-i seconds\fR
.br
    Interval in seconds between pings.

.Sh EXAMPLES

findnic vmnic0 10.2.0.5 10.2.0.4

    binds vmkernel device vmnic0 to 10.2.0.5 and then tries to ping
    the remote machine 10.2.0.4.

findnic -f vmnic1 10.2.0.5 10.2.0.4

   binds vmkernel device vmnic1 to 10.2.0.5 and then tries to flood 
   ping the remote machine 10.2.0.4.
