.\" Copyright 2000 VMware, Inc.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Print with groff -mandoc <thisfile> | lpr
.Dd January 20, 2004
.Dt mem 8
.Os "VMware ESX Server" 2.1
.Sh NAME
.Nm mem
.Nd VMware ESX Server memory resource management
.Sh COPYRIGHT
.if n VMware ESX Server is Copyright 2000 VMware, Inc.  All rights reserved.
.if t VMware ESX Server is Copyright 2000 VMware, Inc.  All rights reserved.
.Sh INTRODUCTION
VMware ESX Server provides dynamic control over the amount of physical
memory allocated to each virtual machine (VM).  Memory may be
\fIovercommitted\fP, so that the total size configured for all running
VMs exceeds the total amount of available physical memory.  The system
manages the allocation of memory to VMs automatically based on
allocation parameters and system load. 
.Pp
Initial memory allocation values for a VM may be specified in its
configuration file.  An administrator may also modify most memory
allocation parameters dynamically using the web-based VMware
Management Interface, the Service Console command-line interface, or
the Perl API.  Reasonable defaults are used automatically when
parameters are not specified explicitly.  Information about current
memory allocations and other status is also available via the
Management Interface, the Service Console procfs interface, and the
Perl API.
.Pp
.Ss Allocation Parameters
.Pp
Three basic parameters control the allocation of memory to each VM:
its minimum size \fImin\fP, its maximum size \fImax\fP, and its
\fIshares\fP allocation.  The system automatically allocates an amount
of memory to each VM somewhere between its \fImin\fP and \fImax\fP
sizes based on its \fIshares\fP and an estimate of its recent working
set size.
.Pp
The \fImax\fP size is the amount of memory configured for use
by the guest OS running in the VM.  This maximum size must be be
specified in the configuration file for the VM.  By default, VMs
operate at their maximum allocation, unless memory is overcommitted.
.Pp
The \fImin\fP size is a guaranteed lower bound on the amount of memory
that will be allocated to the VM, even when memory is overcommitted.
The system uses an admission control policy to enforce this guarantee.
A new VM will not be permitted to power on if there is insufficient
memory to reserve its \fImin\fP size.
.Pp
Memory \fIshares\fP entitle a VM to a fraction of physical memory.
For example, a VM that has twice as many shares as another is
generally entitled to consume twice as much memory, subject to their
respective \fImin\fP and \fImax\fP constraints, provided that they
are both actively using the memory they have been allocated.
.Pp
.Ss Admission Control
.Pp
VMware ESX Server uses an admission control policy to ensure that
sufficient unreserved memory and swap space is available before
powering on a VM.  Memory must be reserved for the guaranteed
\fImin\fP size, as well as additional \fIoverhead\fP memory required
for virtualization; i.e. a total of \fImin + overhead\fP.  The
overhead memory size is determined automatically; it is typically 54MB
for a uniprocessor VM (with 1 virtual cpu) and 64MB for a
multiprocessor VM (with 2 virtual cpus).  Additional overhead memory
is reserved for VMs larger than 512MB.  Swap space must be reserved for
the remaining VM memory; i.e. \fImax - min\fP.  This swap reservation
is required to ensure the system is able to preserve VM memory under
any circumstances; in practice, only a small fraction may actually
be used.  Similarly, while memory reservations are used for
admission control, actual memory allocations
vary dynamically, and unused reservations are not wasted.
.Pp
The amount of swap space configured for the system limits the maximum
level of overcommitment. A total of 8 swap files each with a maximum
size of 64GB are supported. A default swap file with size equal to
physical memory size is recommended in order to support a reasonable
2\fIx\fP level of memory overcommitment.  Larger or smaller swap files
may be configured.  If no swap file is configured, memory may not be
overcommitted.  The swap files may be configured using the Management
Interface, or alternatively from the Service Console vmkfstools(1)
command-line program. These swap files can be configured even while
the system is running.
.Pp
.Ss Dynamic Allocation
.Pp
VMs are allocated their \fImax\fP memory size unless memory is
overcommitted.  When memory is overcommitted, each VM will be
allocated an amount of memory somewhere between its \fImin\fP and
\fImax\fP sizes.  The amount of memory granted to a VM above its
\fImin\fP size may vary with the current memory load.  The system
automatically determines allocations for each VM based on two factors:
the number of \fIshares\fP it has been given and an estimate of its
recent working set size.
.Pp
VMware ESX Server uses a modified proportional-share memory allocation
policy.  Memory \fIshares\fP entitle a VM to a fraction of physical
memory.  For example, a VM that has twice as many shares as another is
entitled to consume twice as much memory, subject to their respective
\fImin\fP and \fImax\fP constraints, provided that they are both
actively using the memory they have been allocated.  In general, a VM
with \fIS\fP memory shares in a system with an overall total of
\fIT\fP shares is entitled to receive at least a fraction \fIS / T\fP
of physical memory.
.Pp
However, VMs that are not actively using their currently-allocated
memory will automatically have their effective number of shares
reduced, in order to prevent VMs from unproductively hoarding idle
memory.  This is achieved by levying a \fItax\fP on idle memory; a VM
is charged more for an idle page than for one that it is actively
using.  The \fIMemIdleTax\fP configuration option provides explicit
control over the policy for reclaiming idle memory.  A tax rate of
\fIx\fP% means that up to \fIx\fP% of a VM's idle memory may be
reclaimed.  A low tax rate will mostly ignore working sets and
allocate memory based on \fIshares\fP.  A high tax rate will allow
most idle memory to be reallocated away from VMs that are
unproductively hoarding it, regardless of \fIshares\fP.
.Pp
VMware ESX Server estimates the working set for a VM automatically by
monitoring memory activity over successive periods of VM virtual time.
Estimates are smoothed over several periods using techniques that
respond rapidly to increases in working set size, and more slowly to
decreases in working set size.  This approach ensures that a VM from
which idle memory has been reclaimed will be able to ramp up quickly
to its full share-based allocation once it starts using its memory
more actively.  The default monitoring period may be modified via
the \fIMemSamplePeriod\fP configuration option.
.Pp
.Ss Memory Reclamation
.Pp
VMware ESX Server employs two distinct techniques for dynamically
expanding or contracting the amount of memory allocated to VMs: a
VMware-supplied \fIvmmemctl\fP module that is loaded into the guest OS
running in a VM, and swapping pages from a VM to a server swap file
without any involvment by the guest OS.
.Pp
The preferred mechanism is the \fIvmmemctl\fP driver, which cooperates
with the server to reclaim those pages that are considered least
valuable by the guest operating system.  This proprietary technique
provides predictable performance that closely matches the behavior of
a native system under similar memory constraints.  It effectively
increases or decreases memory pressure on the guest OS, causing the
guest to invoke its own native memory management algorithms.  When
memory is tight, the guest OS decides which particular pages to
reclaim, and if necessary, swaps them to its own virtual disk.  The
guest OS must be configured with sufficient swap space.  Some guest
operating systems may have additional limitations; see the CAVEATS
section below for details.  If necessary, the amount of memory
reclaimed using \fIvmmemctl\fP can be limited via the
\fIsched.mem.maxmemctl\fP configuration file option.
.Pp
Swapping is used to forcibly reclaim memory from a VM when no
\fIvmmemctl\fP driver is available.  This may be the case if the
\fIvmmemctl\fP driver was never installed, has been explicitly
disabled, is not running (e.g., while the guest OS is booting), or is
temporarily unable to reclaim memory quickly enough to satisfy current
system demands.  Standard demand paging techniques fault in swapped
pages as they are accessed by the VM.
.Pp
The \fIvmmemctl\fP approach is used whenever possible for optimum
performance.  Swapping is a reliable mechanism of last resort that the
system uses to reclaim memory only when necessary.
.Pp
.Ss Memory Sharing
.Pp
Many VMware ESX Server workloads present opportunities for sharing
memory across virtual machines.  For example, several VMs may be
running instances of the same guest OS, have the same applications or
components loaded, or contain common data.  In such cases, VMware ESX
Server uses a proprietary \fItransparent page sharing\fP technique to
securely eliminate redundant copies of memory pages.  With memory
sharing, a workload running as VMs often consumes less memory than it
would when running on physical machines.  As a result, higher levels
of overcommitment can be supported efficiently.
.Pp
The VMware ESX Server approach does not require any guest OS
cooperation.  The \fIMemShareScanVM\fP and \fIMemShareScanTotal\fP
configuration options may be used to control the rate at which the
system scans memory for sharing opportunities.
.Pp
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Pp
.Ss VM Configuration File Options
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width xxxx
.It Pa memsize = size
This configuration file option specifies the maximum VM size 
to be \fIsize\fP megabytes (MB).
.Pp
.It Pa sched.mem.minsize = size
This configuration file option specifies the guaranteed minimum VM
size to be \fIsize\fP MB.  The maximum valid value for \fIsize\fP is
100% of the specified maximum VM size.  The minimum valid value for
\fIsize\fP depends on the amount of available swap space.
The default minimum \fIsize\fP is 50% of the specified maximum VM size.
.Pp
.It Pa sched.mem.shares = n
This configuration file option specifies the initial memory share
allocation for a VM to be \fIn\fP shares.  The valid range of 
numeric values for \fIn\fP is 0 to 100000, enabling a large range of
allocation ratios.  The special named values \fIlow\fP, \fInormal\fP,
and \fIhigh\fP may also be used.  These named values are converted
into numbers automatically, using the configurable ESX Server options
\fIMemSharesPerMBLow\fP, \fIMemSharesPerMBNormal\fP, and
\fIMemSharesPerMBHigh\fP, described below.  The default allocation is
\fInormal\fP, which by default specifies a number of shares equal to
10 times the VM's maximum size in MB.
.Pp
.It Pa sched.mem.maxmemctl = size
This configuration file option specifies the maximum amount of memory
that may be reclaimed from the VM using \fIvmmemctl\fP to be
\fIsize\fP megabytes (MB).  If additional memory needs to be
reclaimed, the system will swap instead of using \fIvmmemctl\fP.  The
default maximum \fIsize\fP is half of the specified maximum VM size.
.El
.Pp
.Ss Service Console Interface
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width xxxx
.It Pa /proc/vmware/vm/id/mem/min
Reading from this file reports the minimum memory size in MB for the
VM identified by \fIid\fP.
.Pp
Writing a number \fIsize\fP to this file changes the minimum memory
size for the VM identified by \fIid\fP to \fIsize\fP MB.
.Pp
.It Pa /proc/vmware/vm/id/mem/shares
Reading from this file reports the number of memory shares allocated
to the VM identified by \fIid\fP.
.Pp
Writing a number \fIn\fP to this file changes the number of memory
shares allocated to the VM identified by \fIid\fP to \fIn\fP.  The
valid range of numeric values for \fIn\fP is 0 to 100000.  Note that a
value of zero shares will cause the VM memory size allocation to be
exactly equal to its specified \fImin\fP size, even if excess memory
is available.  The special named values \fIlow\fP, \fInormal\fP, and
\fIhigh\fP may also be used.  These named values are converted into
numbers automatically, using the configurable ESX Server options
\fIMemSharesPerMBLow\fP, \fIMemSharesPerMBNormal\fP, and
\fIMemSharesPerMBHigh\fP, described below.
.Pp
.It Pa /proc/vmware/vm/id/mem/status
Reading from this file reports current status information for the VM
identified by \fIid\fP, including the specified shares, minimum size,
and maximum size parameters, as well as the VM name, current status,
whether the VM is currently waiting for memory to be reserved, current
memory usage, current target size, memory overhead for virtualization,
and the amount of allocated memory actively in use.  All memory sizes
are reported in kilobytes (KB).
.Pp
.It Pa /proc/vmware/sched/mem
Reading from this file reports the memory status information for all
non-system VMs in the entire system, as well as several aggregate
totals.
.Pp
Writing the string "\fIrealloc\fP" to this file causes an immediate
memory reallocation.  Memory is normally reallocated periodically
based every \fIMemBalancePeriod\fP seconds.  Reallocations are also
triggered by significant changes in the amount of free memory.
.Pp
.It Pa /proc/vmware/mem
Reading from this file reports the maximum size with which a new VM
can be powered on, admission control status including the amount of
unreserved memory and unreserved swap space, and the current amount of
free memory in the system.
.Pp
.It Pa /proc/vmware/pshare/status
Reading from this file reports various detailed statistics about
the current status of transparent page sharing.
.Pp
.It Pa /proc/vmware/swap/stats
Reading from this file reports various detailed swap statistics.
.Pp
.It Pa /proc/vmware/config/Mem/SharesPerMBLow
VMware ESX Server option used to convert the special named shares
value \fIlow\fP into a number, expressed in shares per MB of
the VM's maximum size.  Defaults to 5.
.Pp
.It Pa /proc/vmware/config/Mem/SharesPerMBNormal
VMware ESX Server option used to convert the special named shares
value \fInormal\fP into a number, expressed in shares per MB of
the VM's maximum size.  Defaults to 10.
.Pp
.It Pa /proc/vmware/config/Mem/SharesPerMBHigh
VMware ESX Server option used to convert the special named shares
value \fIhigh\fP into a number, expressed in shares per MB of
the VM's maximum size.  Defaults to 20.
.Pp
.It Pa /proc/vmware/config/Mem/BalancePeriod
VMware ESX Server option that specifies the periodic time interval, in
seconds, for automatic memory reallocations.  Reallocations are also
triggered by significant changes in the amount of free memory.
Defaults to 15 seconds.
.Pp
.It Pa /proc/vmware/config/Mem/SamplePeriod
VMware ESX Server option that specifies the periodic time
interval, measured in seconds of VM virtual time, over which memory
activity is monitored in order to estimate working set sizes.
Defaults to 60 seconds.
.Pp
.It Pa /proc/vmware/config/Mem/IdleTax
VMware ESX Server option that specifies the idle memory tax rate,
specified as a percentage.  This tax effectively charges VMs more for
idle memory than for memory that they are actively using.  A tax rate
of 0% defines an allocation policy that ignores working sets and
allocates memory strictly based on \fIshares\fP.  A high tax rate will
result in an allocation policy that allows idle memory to be
reallocated away from VMs that are unproductively hoarding it.
Defaults to 75%.
.Pp
.It Pa /proc/vmware/config/Mem/ShareScanVM
VMware ESX Server option that specifies the maximum per-VM rate at
which memory should be scanned for transparent page sharing
opportunities.  The rate is specified as the number of pages to scan
per second.  Defaults to 50 pages/sec.
.Pp
.It Pa /proc/vmware/config/Mem/ShareScanTotal
VMware ESX Server option that specifies the total system-wide rate at
which memory should be scanned for transparent page sharing
opportunities.  The rate is specified as the number of pages to scan 
per second.  Defaults to 200 pages/sec.
.Pp
.It Pa /proc/vmware/config/Mem/CtlMaxPercent
VMware ESX Server option that limits the maximum amount of memory
that may be reclaimed from any VM using \fIvmmemctl\fP, based on a
percentage of its \fImax\fP size.  Specifying 0 will effectively
disable reclamation via \fIvmmemctl\fP for all VMs.  Defaults to 50.
.Pp
.It Pa /proc/vmware/config/Mem/CtlMax[OSType]
VMware ESX Server options that restrict the maximum amount of memory
that may be reclaimed from a VM using \fIvmmemctl\fP, based on the
limitations of guest operating system type.  The value is specified in
megabytes.  Defaults to 128 for \fIOSType\fP=NT4 (Windows NT 4.0),
2048 for \fIOSType\fP=NT5 (Windows 2000 or Windows 2003), 768 for
\fIOSType\fP=Linux, and 256 for \fIOSType\fP=BSD.
.El
.Pp
.Sh EXAMPLES
.Pp
.Ss Memory Statistics
.Pp
The current memory statistics for a virtual machine can be
read from its the corresponding status file.  For example, 
to view the statistics for the VM with id 103:
.Pp
.nf
.if t .ft CW
  % cat /proc/vmware/vm/103/mem/status
     vm mctl? wait shares     min     max    size/sizetgt
    103 yes   no     2560  131072  262144  217300/ 217300
.Pp     
    memctl/mctltgt swapped/swaptgt  shared  active  overhd/ovhdmax
     39168/  39168    5672/   5672   38164  191756   14508/  32768
.if t .ft P
.fi
.Pp
The output above is shown with additional line breaks, in
order to avoid wrapping long lines.  All memory sizes are reported in
kilobytes (KB); 1 megabyte (MB) = 1024KB.  The columns indicate:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -compact -width mctltgt -offset xxxx
.It Pa vm
virtual machine identifier
.It Pa mctl?
\fIvmmemctl\fP driver active?
.It Pa wait
blocked in a memory wait state?
.It Pa shares
memory shares associated with VM
.It Pa min
minimum size
.It Pa max
maximum size
.It Pa size
current size
.It Pa sizetgt
target size
.It Pa memctl
currently reclaimed using \fIvmmemctl\fP
.It Pa mctltgt
target to reclaim using \fIvmmemctl\fP
.It Pa swapped
currently swapped to vmfs swap file
.It Pa swaptgt
target to swap to vmfs swap file
.It Pa shared
memory shared via transparent page sharing
.It Pa active
current working set estimate
.It Pa overhd
current overhead memory size
.It Pa ovhdmax
maximum overhead memory size
.El
.Pp
In this example, VM 103 is running the \fIvmmemctl\fP driver, and is
not currently blocked waiting for memory.  The VM is configured to use
between 128MB and 256MB, and has been allocated 2560 memory shares.
It is currently allocated about 212MB.  Approximately 44MB has been
reclaimed for use by other VMs: 38MB via \fIvmmemctl\fP, and nearly
6MB via swapping to the ESX server swap file.  Of the 212MB allocated
to the VM, more than 37MB is shared, e.g. with other VMs.  The
current working set estimate for the VM is approximately 187MB. 
About 14MB of overhead memory is currently being used for
virtualization, out of a maximum of 32MB.
.Pp
.Sh CAVEATS
VMware supplies \fIvmmemctl\fP drivers for Windows (NT, 2000, 2003, XP),
Linux, and FreeBSD.  The \fIvmmemctl\fP driver is installed
automatically during the VMware guest OS tools installation.  The
system will use swapping to reclaim memory from VMs running other
guest operating systems, and from VMs that do not install the tools.
.Pp
The maximum amount of memory that the system may attempt to reclaim
using \fIvmmemctl\fP is restricted automatically based on known
limitations of the guest OS type.  Older versions of the
\fIvmmemctl\fP driver do not support this feature; the driver should
be upgraded to the current version.  Alternatively, the configuration
file option \fIsched.mem.maxmemctl\fP may be specified manually.  See
the description of the VMware ESX Server option
\fIMemCtlMax[OSType]\fP for appropriate limits.
.Pp
.Sh SEE ALSO
cpu(8), numa(8), diskbw(8), vmkfstools(1)
