.\" Copyright 2000 VMware, Inc.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Print with groff -mandoc <thisfile> | lpr
.Dd February 8, 2001
.Dt net 8
.Os VMware
.Sh NAME
.Nm net
.Nd VMware ESX Server network interface management
.Sh COPYRIGHT
.if n VMware ESX Server is Copyright 2000 VMware, Inc.  All rights reserved.
.if t VMware ESX Server is Copyright 2000 VMware, Inc.  All rights reserved.
.Sh INTRODUCTION
VMware ESX Server allows system administrators to allow or disallow
promiscuous mode on network interfaces and to print out network
statistics.  Promiscuous mode can be allowed or disallowed on a 
per-interface basis or on a per-VM basis.  Likewise, statistics can be
printed on a per-interface basis or on a per-VM basis.
.Sh PROMISCUOUS MODE
Promiscuous mode can be controlled and queried on a per-interface basis 
by accessing the file /proc/vmware/net/NIC-NAME/config where NIC-NAME is 
the name of the network interface that is of interest.  To find out the 
status of the interface you would do
.nf
.Pp
    cat /proc/vmware/net/NIC-NAME/config
.Pp
To enable promiscuous mode on this interface you would do
.Pp
    echo "PromiscuousAllowed Yes" >> /proc/vmware/net/NIC-NAME/config
.Pp
To disable promiscuous mode on this interface you would do
.Pp
    echo "PromiscuousAllowed No" >> /proc/vmware/net/NIC-NAME/config
.Pp
.fi
Once promiscuous mode is allowed on an interface, by default 
all virtual machines that use that interface will be allowed 
to put the interface in promiscuous mode.  If you want to control
which particular VMs are allowed to put an interface in promiscuous 
mode, you can do this through the proc interface as well.  For each
virtual NIC on each VM that is attached to a particular
interface, there will be a file under the /proc/vmware/net/NIC-NAME
directory whose name will be the MAC address of the virtual NIC.
.Pp
To find out the status of a particular virtual NIC you would do
.nf
.Pp
    cat /proc/vmware/net/NIC-NAME/MAC-ADDR
.Pp
To enable promiscuous mode on this virtual NIC you would do
.Pp
    echo "PromiscuousAllowed Yes" >> /proc/vmware/net/NIC-NAME/MAC-ADDR
.Pp
To disable promiscuous mode on this interface you would do
.Pp
    echo "PromiscuousAllowed No" >> /proc/vmware/net/NIC-NAME/MAC-ADDR
.Pp
.fi
.Sh STATISTICS
Statistics can be printed out on a per-interface basis by printing out
the file /proc/vmware/net/NIC-NAME/stats
.Pp
    cat /proc/vmware/net/NIC-NAME/stats
.Pp
Statistics can be printed out for each virtual NIC instance by printing 
out the file /proc/vmware/net/NIC-NAME/MAC-ADDR
.Pp
    cat /proc/vmware/net/NIC-NAME/MAC-ADDR
.Sh EXAMPLES
Suppose you have one interface named "vmnic0" and it is being used by
two virtual machines.  The MAC addresses for the virtual machine's NICs
are 00:50:56:f5:09:54 and 00:50:56:f5:09:1f.  If you want to figure out
the status of promiscuous mode on this interface we would simply cat the
config file
.Pp
.nf
    % cat /proc/vmware/net/vmnic0/config
.fi
.Pp
To turn promiscuous mode on for the interface you would just do the command
.Pp
.nf
   % echo "PromiscuousAllowed Yes" >> /proc/vmware/net/vmnic0/config
.fi
.Pp
To check out the status of the virtual NIC with MAC address 00:50:56:f5:09:54
you would simply cat the file with the same name
.Pp
.nf
    % cat /proc/vmware/net/vmnic0/00:50:56:f5:09:54
.fi
.Pp
To turn promiscuous mode off for this virtual NIC you just do the command
.nf
    % echo "PromiscuousAllowed No" >> /proc/vmware/net/vmnic0/00:50:56:f5:09:54
.fi
.Pp
