.\" Copyright 2000 VMware, Inc.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Print with groff -mandoc <thisfile> | lpr
.Dd May 30, 2003
.Dt nfshaper 8
.Os "VMware ESX Server" 2.0
.Sh NAME
.Nm nfshaper
.Nd VMware ESX Server traffic shaper 
.Sh COPYRIGHT
.if n VMware ESX Server is Copyright 2000 VMware, Inc.  All rights reserved.
.if t VMware ESX Server is Copyright 2000 VMware, Inc.  All rights reserved.
.Sh INTRODUCTION
VMware ESX Server supports a loadable 
.Nm nfshaper
module for network traffic shaping, implemented as a general VMware
network filter.  The shaper implements a two-bucket
composite traffic shaping algorithm.  A first token bucket controls
sustained average bandwidth and burstiness.  A second token bucket
controls peak bandwidth during bursts.
.Pp
The procfs interface described in filters(5) is used to attach an
.Nm nfshaper
instance to a virtual machine (VM), detach an
.Nm nfshaper
instance from a VM, query the status of an
.Nm nfshaper
instance, or issue a dynamic command to an active
.Nm nfshaper
instance.
.Sh COMMANDS
.Bl -tag -width xxxx
.It Pa config bpsAverage bpsPeak burstSize [periodPeak]
Dynamically reconfigure the shaper to use the specified parameters:
average bandwidth of \fIbpsAverage\fP bits per second, peak bandwidth
of \fIbpsPeak\fP bits per second, maximum burst size of
\fIburstSize\fP bytes, and an optional peak bandwidth enforcement 
period \fIperiodPeak\fP in milliseconds.  Each parameter may optionally
use the suffix \fIk\fP (1\fIk\fP = 1000) or \fIm\fP (1\fIm\fP = 1000k).
.Pp
.It Pa maxq nPackets
Dynamically set the maximum number of queued packets to \fInPackets\fP.
.Pp
.It Pa reset
Dynamically reset shaper statistics.
.Pp
.El
.Pp
.Sh EXAMPLES
Suppose that we want to attach a traffic shaper to limit the transmit
bandwidth of the virtual machine with VM id 104.  To create and
attach a new shaper instance we issue an \fIxmitpush\fP command as
described in filters(5).  Note that root privileges are required
to attach a filter:
.Pp
.nf
    # echo "104 nfshaper 1m 2m 160k" > /proc/vmware/filters/xmitpush
.fi
.Pp
To find the number of the attached nfshaper instance, query
the network filtering status, which contains a list of all filters 
attached to VMs:
.Pp
.nf
    % cat /proc/vmware/filters/status
.fi
.Pp
Suppose the reported status information indicates that the filter
attached to VM 104 is \fInfshaper.2.104\fP.  The procfs node for
this filter can be used to obtain status information:
.Pp
.nf
    % cat /proc/vmware/filters/xmit/nfshaper.2.104
.fi
.Pp
The same procfs node can also be used to issue commands supported
by the nfshaper class.  For example, you can dynamically adjust
the bandwidth limits by issuing a \fIconfig\fP command:
.Pp
.nf
    # echo "config 128k 256k 20k" > /proc/vmware/filters/xmit/nfshaper.2.104
.fi
.Pp
When a VM is terminated, all attached network filters are automatically
removed and destroyed.  To manually remove a shaper instance we can
issue an \fIxmitpop\fP command as described in filters(5).  Note that
root privileges are required to detach a filter:
.Pp
.nf
    # echo "104" > /proc/vmware/filters/xmitpop
.fi
.Pp
.Sh SEE ALSO
filters(5), vmkload_mod(1)
