.\" Copyright 2004 VMware, Inc.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Print with groff -mandoc <thisfile> | lpr
.Dd June 19, 2000
.Dt vm-support 1
.Os VMnix
.Sh NAME
.Nm vm-support
.Nd Script for gathering debugging information.
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm vm-support
\fIOPTIONS\fR
.Sh COPYRIGHT
.if n VMware ESX Server is Copyright 2004 VMware, Inc.  All rights reserved.
.if t VMware ESX Server is Copyright 200. VMware, Inc.  All rights reserved.
.Sh DESCRIPTION
vm-support is script creates a tar archive containing debugging information 
about the server.  vm-support has three main uses: gathering general debugging 
information, gathering performance information, gathering information about a 
specific virtual machine.  A gzipped tar archive containing the gathered data 
is created in the current directory.  The resulting tar archive will be named 
esx-{date}.{PID}.tgz.

.Sh GENERAL OPTIONS
.br
\fB-n\fR
.br
   Causes all core files to be left out of the tar archive.  Mutually 
   exclusive with the \fB-a\fR option.

\fB-a\fR
.br
   Causes all core files to be included -- even those from previous 
   invocations of this script.  Mutually exclusive with the \fB-n\fR option.

\fB-h\fR
.br
   Prints a friendly help message.

.Sh PERFORMANCE OPTIONS

\fB-s\fR
.br
   Takes performance snapshots in addition to normal debugging 
   information.  Mutually exclusive with the \fB-S\fR option.

\fB-S\fR
.br
   Takes only performance snapshots.  Mutually exclusive with 
   the \fB-s\fR option.

\fB-d\fR \fIseconds\fR
.br
   Duration of snapshot.  Default 300 seconds.

\fB-i\fR \fIseconds\fR
.br
   Time in seconds to sleep between each snapshot.  Default: autodetect.

.Sh VIRTUAL MACHINE OPTIONS

\fB-x\fR
.br
   Lists available virtual machines and corresponding world ids for 
   use with the \fB-X\fR options.

\fB-X\fR \fIworld id\fR
.br
   Takes only debugging information for the specified world. 

.Sh EXAMPLES

vm-support

    Gathers general debugging information.

vm-support -S

   Takes performance snapshots, at the default interval for the default 
   duration.

vm-support -s -i 10 -d 600

   Gathers general debugging information and takes a perforamance 
   snapshot every 10 seconds for 10 minutes.

vm-support -x

   Lists the running virtual machines for use with vm-support -X.

vm-support -X 314
   
   Gathers only virtual machine specific debugging information for the 
   virtual machine 314.

.Sh TROUBLESHOOTING

   Make sure there is enough disk space in the current directory.  
   Temporary files creating during the running of vm-support quite 
   large.

   If vm-support never completes check for dead or not responding nfs or 
   smbfs mounts.
