.\" Copyright 2000 VMware, Inc.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Print with groff -mandoc <thisfile> | lpr
.Dd October 28, 2004
.Dt vmkdump 1
.Os VMnix
.Sh NAME
.Nm vmkdump
.Nd VMkernel dumper
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm vmkdump
\fIOPTIONS\fR
.Sh COPYRIGHT
.if n VMware ESX Server is Copyright 2004 VMware, Inc.  All rights reserved.
.if t VMware ESX Server is Copyright 2004 VMware, Inc.  All rights reserved.
.Sh DESCRIPTION
vmkdump manages the VMkernel dump partition.
.Sh OPTIONS
.br
\fB-p, --partition\fR adapter:target:lun:partition
.br
    Specify the partition where the VMkernel should dump the compressed
    core.  The dump partition must be specified after the appropriate
    disk adapter has been loaded into the VMkernel.

\fB-q, --query\fR
.br
    Print out the current dump partition.

\fB-d, --devname deviceName\fR
.br
    Specify the Linux console device that should be used to read the 
    VMkernel dump.  Note: This option should not be used after the dump
    partition has been set with the -p option.  If the partition has
    been set, you need to stop and reset the VMkernel before using this
    option.

\fB-n, --newonly\fR
.br
    For each VMkernel dump that is produced, a count is kept of the
    number of times the compressed dump file has been read off the dump
    partition.  When this option is specified, the compressed dump will
    only be read off the dump partition if the read count is zero.

\fB-z, --zdumpname compressedFileName\fR
.br
    When reading from the dump partition, this option specifies the name
    of the file to create with the compressed dump.  By default the name
    is vmkernel-zdump.#, where # is a unique number.

\fB-s, --slot slotnum\fR
.br
    On dump partitions that reside on shared storage, multiple machines
    can share the dump partition.  Because of this, the dump partition is
    split up into multiple slots.  Generally, when retrieving a core
    dump, the physical machine's UUID is hashed into a slot number based
    on the total number of slots, and the compressed dump is
    automatically read from that slot.  However, there may be situations
    where the machine that dumped core is no longer able to retrieve core
    dumps.  In those cases, this option can be used to override the
    normal UUID hash algorithm for determining a slot.  Note that the
    slot used during a core dump will be displayed on the PSOD.

\fB-x, --extract compressedFileName\fR
.br
    After the compressed dump has been copied off the dump partition to a
    file, this option can be used to extract and decompress the core and
    log.  The core and log will be created in files named vmkernel-core.#
    and vmkernel-log.#, respectively, where # is a unique number, not
    necessarily the same for both files.

.Sh EXAMPLES

vmkdump -p vmhba0:0:0:3

    Sets the dump partition to scsi adapter 0, target 0, lun 0,
    partition 3.

vmkdump -d /dev/sda3

    Creates a file name vmkernel-zdump.# contained a compressed dump.
    # is 1 if no other compressed dumps are in the current
    directory, otherwise # is the lowest unused integer (ie, if up to
    vmkernel-zdump.5 exist, then it would create vmkernel-zdump.6).

vmkdump -x vmkernel-zdump.1

    Extracts the core and log from vmkernel-zdump.1 into vmkernel-core.#
    and vmkernel-log.#, respectively, where # for each file may not be
    the same.
