.\" Copyright 2000 VMware, Inc.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Print with groff -mandoc <thisfile> | lpr
.Dd March 22, 2001
.Dt vmkload_mod 1
.Os VMnix
.Sh NAME
.Nm vmkload_mod
.Nd VMkernel module loader
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm vmkload_mod
\fIOPTIONS\fR \fIMODULE-BINARY\fR \fIMODULE-TAG\fR \fIPARAMETERS\fR
.Sh COPYRIGHT
.if n VMware ESX Server is Copyright 2000 VMware, Inc.  All rights reserved.
.if t VMware ESX Server is Copyright 2000 VMware, Inc.  All rights reserved.
.Sh DESCRIPTION
vmkload_mod is a program that is used to load device driver and network shaper
modules into the VMkernel.  vmkload_mod can also be used to unload a module,
list the loaded modules, and list the available parameters for each module.
The MODULE-BINARY and MODULE-TAG parts of the command line are
required when a module is loaded and are ignored when the --unload, --list, and
--showparam options are used.  The PARAMETERS part of the command line is
optional and also only makes sense when a module is being loaded.
.br

.br
When vmkload_mod is invoked to load a module, MODULE-BINARY is the name of the 
module binary that is to be loaded and MODULE-TAG is the name that the VMkernel 
should associate with the loaded module.  The tag can be any string of letters and 
numbers.  If the module is a device driver, the VMkernel will name the module with 
the MODULE_TAG plus a number starting from zero.  If there are multiple device 
instances created by loading the module or multiple device driver modules loaded 
with the same tag, then each device will get a unique number based on order of
device instance creation.
.Sh OPTIONS
.br
\fB-l\fR
.br
\fB--list\fR
.br
    List out the current modules that are loaded.

\fB-u MODULE-BINARY\fR
.br
\fB--unload MODULE-BINARY\fR
.br
    Unload the named module.

\fB-v\fR
.br
\fB--verbose\fR
.br
    Be verbose during module loading.

\fB-d SCSI-DEVICE-NAME\fR
.br
\fB--device SCSI-DEVICE-NAME\fR
.br
    The module being loaded is for a SCSI adapter that is currently being
    used by the console operating system.  After the module is loaded the 
    SCSI adapter will be controlled by the VMkernel but the console OS 
    will continue to be able to access all SCSI devices.  The format of 
    SCSI-DEVICE-NAME is \fIPCI-Bus:PCI-slot\fR.

\fB-e\fR
.br
\fB--exportsym\fR
.br
    Export all global exported symbols from this module. This will allow 
    other modules to use exported functions and variables from the loaded 
    module.  This option should not be used for normal device driver
    and shaper modules since there may be symbol conflicts.

\fB-s\fR
.br
\fB--showparam\fR
.br
    List all available module parameters that can be specified in the
    PARAMETER section of the command line.

.Sh PARAMETERS
Modules can specify parameters that can be set on the command line.
A list of these parameters is shown via the --showparam option.  In 
order to set one of these parameters, a name-value pair must be specified
at the end of the command line.  The syntax is of the form \fIname=value\fR.
Any number of parameters can be specified.

.Sh EXAMPLES

vmkload_mod /usr/lib/vmware/vmkmod/e100.o vmnic debug=5

   loads the module /usr/lib/vmware/vmkmod/e100.o into the VMkernel.  The
   tag for this module is \fBvmnic\fR.  Each e100 card that was
   assigned to the VMkernel will be given the name \fBvmnic#\fR, where #
   starts at 0.  For example if there were two e100 cards assigned to
   the VMkernel, these would have VMkernel names of vmnic0 and vmnic1.
   The module parameter \fIdebug\fR will be set to the value 5.

vmkload_mod --device 0:12 /usr/lib/vmware/vmkmod/aic7xxx.o vmhba

   loads the module /usr/lib/vmware/vmkmod/aic7xxx.o into the VMkernel.  The 
   tag for this module is \fBvmhba\fR.  The Adaptec SCSI adapter is 
   currently being used by the console operating system.  The SCSI
   adapter is located on PCI bus 0, slot 12.

vmkload_mod --exportsym /usr/lib/vmware/vmkmod/vmklinux linuxdrivers

   loads the module /usr/lib/vmware/vmkmod/vmklinux into the VMkernel.  All
   exported symbols from this module will be available to other modules
   that are subsequently loaded.  The vmklinux module is the module that
   allows Linux device drivers to run in the VMkernel so it is one of the
   few modules for which the --exportsym option makes sense.
